---
title: How to use OpenAPI with minimal APIs
author: rick-anderson
description: Learn how to use OpenApi (Swagger and Swashbuckle) features of minimal APIs in ASP.NET Core.
ms.author: riande
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-6.0'
ms.date: 09/30/2022
uid: fundamentals/minimal-apis/openapi
---

# OpenAPI support in minimal APIs - ASP.NET Core

:::moniker range="= aspnetcore-6.0"

An app can describe the [OpenAPI specification](https://swagger.io/specification/) for route handlers using [Swashbuckle](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Swashbuckle.AspNetCore/).

The following code is a typical ASP.NET Core app with OpenAPI support:

[!code-csharp[](samples/WebMinAPIs/Program.cs?name=snippet_swag)]

### Exclude Open API description

In the following sample, the `/skipme` endpoint is excluded from generating an OpenAPI description:

[!code-csharp[](samples/WebMinAPIs/Program.cs?name=snippet_swag2)]

### Describe response types

The following example uses the built-in result types to customize the response:

[!code-csharp[](samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_getCustom)]

### Add operation ids to Open API

[!code-csharp[](samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_name)]

### Add tags to the Open API description

The following code uses an [OpenAPI grouping tag](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/grouping-operations-with-tags/):

[!code-csharp[](samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_grp)]

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-7.0"

The [OpenAPI specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/latest.html)) is a programming language-agnostic standard for documenting HTTP APIs. This standard is supported in minimal APIs through a combination of built-in APIs and open-source libraries. There are three key aspects to OpenAPI integration in an application:

* Generating information about the endpoints in the app.
* Gathering the information into a format that matches the OpenAPI schema.
* Exposing the generated OpenAPI schema via a visual UI or a serialized file.

Minimal APIs provides built-in support for generating information about endpoints in an app via the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi` package. Exposing the generated OpenAPI definition via a visual UI requires a third-party package. 

The following code is generated by the ASP.NET Core minimal web API template and uses OpenAPI:

[!code-csharp[](7.0-samples/WebMinOpenApi/Program.cs?name=snippet&highlight=1,5-6,12-13,35-36)]

In the preceding highlighted code:

* `Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi` is explained in the next section.
* <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.EndpointMetadataApiExplorerServiceCollectionExtensions.AddEndpointsApiExplorer%2A> : Configures the app to use the API Explorer to discover and describe endpoints with default annotations. `WithOpenApi` overrides matching, default annotations generated by the API Explorer with those produced from the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi` package.
* `UseSwagger`adds the [Swagger middleware](xref:tutorials/get-started-with-swashbuckle#add-and-configure-swagger-middleware).
* `UseSwaggerUI` enables the [Static File Middleware](xref:fundamentals/static-files).
* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RoutingEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.WithName%2A>: The <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.IEndpointNameMetadata> on the endpoint is used for link generation and is treated as the operation ID in the given endpoint's OpenAPI specification.
* [`WithOpenApi`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/8a4b4deb09c04134f22f8d39aae21d212282004f/src/OpenApi/src/OpenApiRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions.cs) is explained later in this article.

<a name="openapinuget"></a>

## `Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi` NuGet package

ASP.NET Core provides the [`Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi/) package to interact with OpenAPI specifications for endpoints. The package acts as a link between the OpenAPI models that are defined in the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi` package and the endpoints that are defined in Minimal APIs. The package provides an API that examines an endpoint's parameters, responses, and metadata to construct an OpenAPI annotation type that is used to describe an endpoint.

`Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi` is added as a PackageReference to a project file:

[!code-xml[](7.0-samples/WebMinOpenApi/projectFile.xml?highlight=10)]

When using [`Swashbuckle.AspNetCore`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Swashbuckle.AspNetCore/) with `Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi`, `Swashbuckle.AspNetCore` 6.3.1 and later must be used. Version 6.4.0 or later is required if you want to [provide endpoint summary or description text](#add-endpoint-summary-or-description).

## `WithOpenApi` call on endpoints adds an OpenAPI annotation

Calling [`WithOpenApi`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/8a4b4deb09c04134f22f8d39aae21d212282004f/src/OpenApi/src/OpenApiRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions.cs) on an endpoint without parameters adds an [OpenAPI annotation](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/8a4b4deb09c04134f22f8d39aae21d212282004f/src/OpenApi/src/OpenApiRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions.cs#L65-L82) to the endpoints metadata. This metadata can be:

* Consumed in third-party packages like [Swashbuckle.AspNetCore](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Swashbuckle.AspNetCore/).
* Displayed in the Swagger user interface or in YAML or JSON generated to define the file.

[!code-csharp[](7.0-samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_withopenapi&highlight=9)]

### Call `WithOpenApi` with parameters

The [`WithOpenApi`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/8a4b4deb09c04134f22f8d39aae21d212282004f/src/OpenApi/src/OpenApiRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions.cs#L49) method accepts a function that can be used to modify the OpenAPI annotation. For example, in the following code, a description is added to the first parameter of the endpoint:

[!code-csharp[](7.0-samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_withopenapi2&highlight=9-99)]

## Describe response types

Response types can be described for OpenAPI in the following ways:

* By using a method or attribute that provides metadata
* By using a route handler signature that enables the framework to infer metadata

### Call a method or use an attribute

The [`Produces`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.OpenApiRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions.Produces%2A> method provides metadata that describes an endpoint's result type. Call the method multiple times if there are different result types in different scenarios. For example:

[!code-csharp[](samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_getCustom)]

*** Infer metadata from the route handler signature

If the endpoint returns only one type, return a type defined by <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.TypedResults>, as shown in the following example:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/samples/MultipleResultTypes/Program.cs" id="snippet_single_result_type":::

If the endpoint returns different result types depending on the scenario, use [Results\<TResult1, TResult2,TResultN>](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.HttpResults.Results%606) in the signature, as shown in the following example:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/samples/MultipleResultTypes/Program.cs" id="snippet_multiple_result_types":::

The `Results<TResult1, TResultN>` union types implement implicit cast operators. These operators enable the compiler to automatically convert the types specified in the generic arguments to an instance of the union type. This capability has the added benefit of providing compile-time checking that a route handler only returns the results that it declares it does. Attempting to return a type that isn't declared as one of the generic arguments to `Results<TResult1, TResultN>` results in a compilation error.

Only types that implement <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.Metadata.IEndpointMetadataProvider> provide metadata for OpenApi.

## Add operation IDs to Open API

[!code-csharp[](samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_name)]

## Add tags to the Open API description

The following code uses an [OpenAPI grouping tag](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/grouping-operations-with-tags/):

[!code-csharp[](samples/todo/Program.cs?name=snippet_grp)]

## Add endpoint summary or description

The following highlighted code provides summary and description text for OpenAPI spec generation. You can call extension methods or use attributes:

:::code language="csharp" source="endpoint-description-summary/7.0-samples/OpenAPISummary/Program.cs" id="summary_and_description" highlight="13-14":::

:::code language="csharp" source="endpoint-description-summary/7.0-samples/OpenAPISummary/Program.cs" id="summary_and_description2" highlight="2-3":::

The preceding highlighted code is supported by [`Swashbuckle.AspNetCore`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Swashbuckle.AspNetCore/) 6.4.0 and later.

## Exclude Open API description

In the following sample, the `/skipme` endpoint is excluded from generating an OpenAPI description:

[!code-csharp[](7.0-samples/WebMinAPIs/Program.cs?name=snippet_swag2&highlight=20-21)]

## ASP.NET Core OpenAPI source code on GitHub

* [WithOpenApi](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/8a4b4deb09c04134f22f8d39aae21d212282004f/src/OpenApi/src/OpenApiRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions.cs)
* [OpenApiGenerator](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/OpenApi/src/OpenApiGenerator.cs)

:::moniker-end
